[[CHAPTER]] GENERAL PREFACE.
IT would be presumption to enter upon any commendation of John Owen
as an author and divine. His works will continue to gather round them the
respect and admiration of the Church of Christ, so long as reverence is
cherished for the Christian faith. They have defects, which it is impossible
to disguise. His style in general is deficient in grace and vivacity. His mode
of discussing a subject is often tedious and prolix. Whatever amount of
imaginative power his mind possessed, it seems to have been little
cultivated and developed; and his chief excellence as an author, it must be
admitted, consists “non in flosculis verborum, — sed in pondere rerum”
In the department of Biblical criticism, he himself disclaimed any
pretentious to extensive learning. That science had made slender progress
in his day, and the necessity for careful revision of the text of Scripture, as
well as the abundance of the materials which providentially existed for the
accomplishment of the task, were scarcely known. We feel the less
surprise that he should have committed himself to a strain of
animadversion, full of prejudice and misapprehension, on the principles
asserted in the Prolegomena and Appendix to Walton’s Polyglot, when it
is remembered that, after the lapse of half a century, and with all his
eminent scholarship and erudition, Whitby, on the criticism of the sacred
text, was not a step in advance of the Puritan divine.
With all this abatement on the praise which is due to Owen, his signal
merits as an author have shed luster on his name. He was great in the
higher attributes of erudition; for he excelled, if not in the learning that is
conversant about dates, and facts, and words, most assuredly in the
learning of thought; and his sentences are sometimes impregnated with an
amount of meaning that indicates vast stores of information on the views
prevalent in past ages regarding the doctrines of Christianity. His treatises
on experimental religion are yet unrivalled; and it is wonderful with what
ease and point he brings the highest principles of the faith to bear on the
workings of the human heart, and the details of Christian experience. His
controversial writings, apart from their intrinsic merits, have a relative
value that is perhaps too much overlooked, and renders them indispensable
in any good collection of British literature. His writings on toleration are an