###### GENERAL PREFACE.

IT would be presumption to enter upon any commendation of John Owen as an author and divine. His works will continue to gather round them the respect and admiration of the Church of Christ, so long as reverence is cherished for the Christian faith. They have defects, which it is impossible to disguise. His style in general is deficient in grace and vivacity. His mode of discussing a subject is often tedious and prolix. Whatever amount of imaginative power his mind possessed, it seems to have been little cultivated and developed; and his chief excellence as an author, it must be admitted, consists _“non in flosculis verborum, — sed in pondere rerum”_ In the department of Biblical criticism, he himself disclaimed any pretentious to extensive learning. That science had made slender progress in his day, and the necessity for careful revision of the text of Scripture, as well as the abundance of the materials which providentially existed for the accomplishment of the task, were scarcely known. We feel the less surprise that he should have committed himself to a strain of animadversion, full of prejudice and misapprehension, on the principles asserted in the Prolegomena and Appendix to Walton’s Polyglot, when it is remembered that, after the lapse of half a century, and with all his eminent scholarship and erudition, Whitby, on the criticism of the sacred text, was not a step in advance of the Puritan divine.

With all this abatement on the praise which is due to Owen, his signal merits as an author have shed luster on his name. He was great in the higher attributes of erudition; for he excelled, if not in the learning that is conversant about dates, and facts, and words, most assuredly in the learning of thought; and his sentences are sometimes impregnated with an amount of meaning that indicates vast stores of information on the views prevalent in past ages regarding the doctrines of Christianity. His treatises on experimental religion are yet unrivalled; and it is wonderful with what ease and point he brings the highest principles of the faith to bear on the workings of the human heart, and the details of Christian experience. His controversial writings, apart from their intrinsic merits, have a relative value that is perhaps too much overlooked, and renders them indispensable in any good collection of British literature. His writings on toleration are an anticipation of much that has made the name of Locke immortal among the political authors of Great Britain; and there is truth in the assertion, that the philosopher “ploughed with the heifer of the Independent,” His work on Arminianism was the attempt to exhibit a systematic view of the theology which is known by that designation; and in his controversy with John Goodwin, he had to deal with by far its ablest advocate. His elaborate refutation of Socinianism is historically interesting and important, as addressed in reply to Biddle, who first established a Socinian congregation in England. Of his Work entitled, “A Vindication of the Animadversions on the Popish Controversy,” it is said by Orme, that “it embraces the substance of the Popish controversy.” But it is hardly our province to offer any criticism upon the writings of our author. We cannot refrain however, from quoting a brief but very complete judgment pronounced on his merits by a divine whose eminent worth and spiritual sagacity enabled him to appreciate the higher qualities of Owen, and who cannot be accused of any denominational prejudice in his favor. Indeed, some allusions at the close of the extract indicate, that, in the encomium he passes upon the Puritan, his candor triumphs over some degree of bias against him.

Stillingfleet, the champion of the Anglican Church, when he replied to Owen’s strictures on his sermon entitled, “The Mischief of Separation,” acknowledges “the civility and decent language” of his antagonist.

“The divines of the Puritan school, however (with due allowance for the prevalent tone of scholastic subtleties), supply to the Ministerial student a large fund of useful and edifying instruction.

If they be less clear and simple in their doctrinal statements than the Reformers, they enter more deeply into the sympathies of Christian experience. Profoundly versed in spiritual tactics — the habits and exercises of the human heart — they are equally qualified to awaken conviction and to administer consolation, laying open the man to himself with peculiar closeness of application; stripping h in of his false dependencies, and exhibiting before him the light and influence of the Evangelical remedy for his distress. Owen stands pre-eminent among the writers of this school. ‘His scholars’ (as Mr. Cecil observes) ‘will be more profound and enlarged, and better furnished, than those of most other writers.’ Among his voluminous works, we may mark his