Now, this in the soul is either initial, or the solemn consent at the first
entrance of union; or consequential, in renewed acts of consent all our
days. I speak of it especially in this latter sense, wherein it is proper unto
communion; not in the former, wherein it primarily intendeth union.
There are two things that complete this self-resignation of the soul: —
(1st.) The liking of Christ, for his excellency, grace, and suitableness, far
above all other beloveds whatever, preferring him in the judgement and
mind above them all. In the place above mentioned,
<200509>Song of Solomon
5:9, the spouse being earnestly pressed, by professors at large, to give in
her thoughts concerning the excellency of her Beloved in comparison of
other endearments, answereth expressly, that he is “the chiefest of ten
thousand, yea,” verse 16, “altogether lovely,” infinitely beyond
comparison with the choicest created good or endearment imaginable. The
soul takes a view of all that is in this world, “the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life,” and sees it all to be vanity, — that “the
world passeth away, and the lust thereof,”
<620216>1 John 2:16,17. These
beloveds are no way to be compared unto him. It views also legal
righteousness, blamelessness before men, uprightness of conversation,
duties upon conviction, and concludes of all as Paul does,
<500308>Philippians
3:8, “Doubtless, I count all these things loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.” So, also, does the church,
<281403>Hosea
14:3, reject all appearing assistance whatever, — as goodly as Asshur, as
promising as idols, — that God alone may be preferred. And this is the
soul’s entrance into conjugal communion with Jesus Christ as to personal
grace, — the constant preferring him above all pretenders to its affections,
counting all loss and dung in comparison of him. Beloved peace, beloved
natural relations, beloved wisdom and learning, beloved righteousness,
beloved duties, [are] all loss, compared with Christ.
(2ndly.) The accepting of Christ by the will, as its only husband, Lord,
and Savior. This is called “receiving” of Christ,
<430112>John 1:12; and is not
intended only for that solemn act whereby at first entrance we close with
him, but also for the constant frame of the soul in abiding with him and
owning of him as such. When the soul consents to take Christ on his own
terms, to save him in his own way, and says, “Lord, I would have had thee
and salvation in my way, that it might have been partly of mine endeavors,