2. Φιλανθρωπία, — mercy, love, and propensity of mind to help,
assist, relieve them of whom he speaks, towards whom he is so
affected.
3.  [Ελεος, — mercy forgiveness, compassion, tenderness, to them that
suffer; and χάρις, — free pardoning bounty, undeserved love. And all
this is said to be τοῦ Θεοῦ σωτῆρος, — he exercises all these
properties and attributes of his nature towards us that he may save us;
and in the bestowing of it, giving us the Holy Ghost, it is said,
ἐξέχεεν, — he poured him out as water out of a vessel, without stop
and hesitation; and that not in a small measure, but πλουσίως, —
richly and in abundance: whence, as to the work itself, it is
emphatically said, δικαιωθέντες τῆ ἐκείνου χάριτι, — justified by
the grace of him who is such a one. And this do the saints of God, in
their communion with Christ, exceedingly rejoice in before him, that
the way of their acceptation before God is a way of grace, kindness,
and mercy, that they might not boast in themselves, but in the Lord
and his goodness, crying, “How great is thy goodness! how great is thy
bounty!”
(4.) They approve of it, and rejoice in it, as a quay of great peace and
security to themselves and their own souls. They remember what was
their state and condition whilst they went about to set up a righteousness
of their own, and were not subject to the righteousness of Christ, — how
miserably they were tossed up and down with continual fluctuating
thoughts. Sometimes they had hope, and sometimes were full of fear;
sometimes they thought themselves in some good condition, and anon
were at the very brink of hell, their consciences being racked and torn with
sin and fear: but now, “being justified by faith, they have peace with
God,”
<450501>Romans 5:1. All is quiet and serene; not only that storm is over,
but they are in the haven where they would be. They have abiding peace
with God. Hence is that description of Christ to a poor soul,
<233202>Isaiah
32:2,
[[BLOCKQUOTE]] “And a man shall he as a hiding-place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.”