and as it were by the works of the law; I am now willing to receive thee
and to be saved in thy way, — merely by grace: and though I would have
walked according is my own mind, yet now I wholly give up myself to be
ruled by thy Spirit: for in thee have I righteousness and strength, in thee
am I justified and do glory;” — then does it carry on communion with
Christ as to the grace of his person. This it is to receive the Lord Jesus in
his comeliness and eminency. Let believers exercise their hearts abundantly
unto this thing. This is choice communion with the Son Jesus Christ. Let
us receive him in all his excellencies, as he bestows himself upon us; — be
frequent in thoughts of faith, comparing him with other beloveds, sin,
world, legal righteousness; and preferring him before them, counting them
all loss and dung in comparison of him. And let our souls be persuaded of
his sincerity and willingness in giving himself, in all that he is, as mediator
unto us, to be ours; and let our hearts give up themselves unto him. Let us
tell him that we will be for him, and not for another: let him know it from
us; he delights to hear it, yea, he says, “Sweet is our voice, and our
countenance is comely;” — and we shall not fail in the issue of sweet
refreshment with him.
[[DIGRESSION]] DIGRESSION 1.
[[SUMMARY]] Some excellencies of Christ proposed to consideration, to endear our hearts unto him — His description, <200501>Song of Solomon 5, opened.
To strengthen our hearts in the resignation mentioned of ourselves unto the
Lord Christ as our husband, as also to make way for the stirring of us up
to those consequential conjugal affections of which mention shall afterward
be made, I shall turn aside to a more full description of some of the
personal excellencies of the Lord Christ, whereby the hearts of his saints
are indeed endeared unto him.
In “The LORD our Righteousness,” then, may these ensuing things be
considered; which are exceeding suitable to prevail upon our hearts to give
up themselves to be wholly his: —
1. He is exceeding excellent and desirable in his Deity, and the glory
thereof. He is “Jehovah our Righteousness,”
<242306>Jeremiah 23:6. In the
rejoicing of Zion at his coming to her, this is the bottom, “Behold thy